what is the keto diet
why is it that people need fat and
what's the the experience that you think
that they'll get out of switching their
diet around
well so that's a very complex
question um and comp and there's a
complex equation behind it but people
need fat fat is a
uh you know provides not just
uh burnable calories fuel but fat uh
certain types of fat
play critical roles in the creation of
cell membranes in the
in the communication between
cells
in certain hormone precursor situations
um
a certain amount of body fat is just uh
sort of requisite to be healthy in the
first place so you we're not all
striving to be two percent you know body
fat people
uh but the the idea that fat
makes you fat has been
long dispelled i mean this was like
that's a quote from susan powder back in
the 80s right
and uh
and it still somehow
made its way into medicine for for some
unknown reason because the research has
been very clear
um we need we need certain amount of fat
in our diet
and that's kind of the beauty of keto
for instance is that we is that we we
look at how we can take
this
millions of years of evolution and
harness it to become really good at
burning fat to become less dependent on
glucose to spare the protein that we
otherwise would be burning for calories
uh and and it's all part of this
great
system that we evolved i don't want to
co-opt your show here but i want to talk
to talk about something please okay
we talk about metabolic flexibility a
lot now in this new
era of of macros metabolic flexibility
simply means that you're able to extract
energy from the fat on your plate the
fat on your body the carbohydrates on
your plate the glycogen in your muscles
the glucose in your bloodstream
the ketones that your liver makes that's
flexibility that's getting energy from
all these different substrates and not
become dependent on burning
uh protein to create glucose yeah so
keto is a a low carb high fat moderate
protein lifestyle i kind of feel like
there is not a one size fits all with
diets but for me the thing that i hear
over and over is it's like the thing
that really helps people who feel like
they have tried everything else and
nothing else has worked
but ultimately i feel like that's the
way that we were really meant to be
eating to begin with i don't think that
all these processed foods and all the
things that are so high in sugar
was what we were supposed to be eating
so now switching to this way of eating i
feel so much better i actually grew up
thinking that i had really bad stomach
issues and had to get all kinds of
testing because i was always feeling
sick all the time and then when i
switched to keto i was like it was
totally gone
um so and then on top of that in just
one year i had lost 100 pounds so it's
like obviously the only thing that i
changed with what was what i was eating
so to me that was kind of like all right
like this we're going in the right
direction
the cholesterol myth
walk me through what parts of the um
the cholesterol numbers people should be
caring about not caring about um because
so in my own life i went through a
period that lasted probably for about
two and a half years where i was
essentially doing rabbit starvation
right so i was eating basically chicken
breast broccoli nothing on it no oil
nothing i felt amazing i felt terrible
exactly absolutely horrifying right but
damn i was lean
and it was amazing
uh but yeah i was i joint pain just was
like in pure insanity and then i because
i heard that ketogenics possibly had
some cancer prevention stuff i tried it
and it was like it was like taking a
drug it was so anti-inflammatory on my
joints i was like well i'm never going
back to rabid starvation that was crazy
right um but
my cholesterol levels were so low when i
was doing the rabbit starvation
and i thought that was a good thing that
i was super amped i felt bulletproof
thought i was going to live forever then
when i started doing ketogenics my
numbers went significantly up and my
doctor was like
we have to get you on lipitor and i was
like you must be joking i've got two
guns tom i've got a 12 gauge shotgun and
i've got a bb gun you're gonna get shot
with one of them which one do you pick
i'll take the bb gun if i die that's it
and that's that makes good sense and so
my contention is is that an elevated a1c
an elevated c peptide which tells me
your blood sugar and and serum insulin
levels are always high
a very low hdl and a very high
triglyceride level
those four tests those that's the
shotgun
if your ldl is is 250 300 that might
might be a bb gun but the the even the
research on levels that high is
completely inconclusive if your doctor
says oh you have a high total
cholesterol you need to be on lipitor
you need to find a new doctor because
he's at least 10 years behind in his
reading okay now if he talks about ldl
then he's at least current but still
when you look at the research in its
totality it's not a risk factor it might
be a bb gun but it's not the shotgun
that that high blood sugar high insulin
low hdl and high triglycerides are
that's the shotgun that's going to kill
you
so every cell membrane in your body has
to have cholesterol to function properly
and so when we tell everybody you've got
to eat less cholesterol and i'm going to
put you on this peel to lower your
cholesterol even lower and i want you to
eat lots of whole grains and i want you
to use canola oil because if you use
bacon grease that's going to give you a
heart attack right and so when you're
using basically what amounts to
artificial fat instead of real fats
you're building inferior cell membranes
and so every cell in your body is an
increased risk of something bad and in
the skin that could wind up being eczema
it can wind up being psoriasis it can
wind up being one of the skin cancers
what to eat on a keto diet
i wrote two books that are sort of diet
focused one of them is head strong but
the big diet book is the bulletproof
diet and here's the gist of it
it is cyclical ketosis if you
do the the the keto bro diet as i'm
going to call it right which is you
never eat a carb again i don't think
that's gonna work for you if you eat
lots of carbs that's not gonna work for
you so you should absolutely do keto and
then you should stop then you should do
keto and then you should stop and this
is for your gut bacteria and this is for
the glial cells in your brain that
prefer glucose to ketones right and so i
feel like like if you go to the oh i'm
going to be like i used to be a raw
vegan
you know that's not going to end well
for you i'll just tell you really you
didn't
enjoy the experience well i mean i felt
great for the first two three months
like most people do because you you're
eating a lot less of the other crap but
it's what happens over time even if
you're pretty knowledgeable very few
people in fact none of the anti-aging
people i know support that kind of thing
because they see it in patients the
crossfit coaches like yeah i can spot a
vegan or raw vegan i ask them to hold on
to a bar and they drop off after five
seconds and people eat french fries can
hold on for 15 seconds if people eat
grass-fed steak and you do keto and you
are doing things right they hold on for
30 seconds like it's quantifiable right
so this isn't a rip on vegans i was a
vegan for a long time i would eat gravel
if it's what was best for me or best for
the planet i'd say eating grass-fed meat
that restores soils um is best for you
and best for the planet but not too much
and that plus a huge plate of vegetables
with lots of undamaged quality fats
following the ratio in your cells
your cells are 45 saturated fat your
cell membranes especially in the brain
is a little bit higher
they're in the brain about 30 35 percent
monounsaturated fat
and then the rest of it is all about the
ratio of omega-3 to omega-6 and there
you want more omega-3 and less omega-6
so tons of veggies moderate amount of
high-quality grass-fed protein tons of
fat the first step would be to just give
the brain an alternative form of energy
and
reduce glucose and insulin spikes as
much as possible because that can
contribute to insulin resistance cut out
sugar as much as possible or processed
carbohydrates if they're eating 2-300
grams a day you want to bring that down
to
under 100 grams a day of lower glycemic
carbohydrates essentially vegetables
and and go from there but if you
abruptly take out glucose from the diet
of someone who's
you know drinking lots of sugary drinks
and things like that that may initially
cause even a greater deficit in
cognitive function because your brain is
being fueled off glucose and may take a
while
to
to induce the adaptations associated
with transporting the ketones utilizing
the ketones and switching your brain to
an alternative form of energy
quantity will kind of trump quality to
some extent so if you are running
a
calorie deficit of a high carbohydrate
diet that has processed foods that
calorie deficit will produce a lot of
beneficial things you know for a lot of
that people are looking for like weight
loss insulin sensitivity even a lowering
of inflammation could be achieved simply
by calorie restriction
and this is
you know there's different you know
areas of thoughts on this but i'm of the
opinion that nutritional ketosis but not
even necessarily that just low
carbohydrate diets allow one
to have the discipline necessary to
implement a dietary strategy that allows
for
you to
induce and sustain a calorie deficit for
one thing and even if you're not at a
calorie deficit simply by not spiking
glucose or spiking insulin and by
elevating beta hydroxybutyrate that
you know that comes with a whole host of
other advantages so including the
anti-inflammatory effects including
perhaps the autoimmune effects perhaps
the gut microbiome
if the ketogenic diet is well formulated
with soluble probably most importantly
insoluble fiber
that can help restore gut health over
time the the foods that are part of the
ketogenic diet
some people will argue you know against
gmos or against you know
grass-fed beef versus corn fed beef and
if you look at the lipid composition of
fatty meats that are from animals that
were grass-fed there is a significant
you know difference in for example
pro-inflammatory fats or much less in
grass-fed meat so i do think that if you
can budget it in to
go with foods
ketogenic strategy it's going to be you
want to get fatty fish meat and poultry
to go with grass-fed relative to
maybe industrial farming practices
in your book you do a great job of not
spending a lot of time demonizing
anything but instead really being quite
prescriptive about okay if you want to
upgrade yourself which is like the big
tag in your website which i absolutely
love so if somebody wants to upgrade
themselves knowing that every word
that's about to come out of your mouth
comes with compassion and knowing that
there's a lot of individual variability
and
you get all of that
but like in a nutshell for somebody that
wants to upgrade themselves what should
they eat and not eat yeah
so you know opt for foods that are
nutrient dense um
one of the easiest things that i
recommend that people
can do every single day is to consume
what i call a large fatty salad
i think it's one of the best ways to
really check off so many of your
nutritional boxes to get an abundance of
dietary fiber that the microbes that
live in your large intestine love to
consume
and when i say fatty i don't mean you
know
throwing on tortilla strips and cheese
and ranch dressing i mean you know
taking a bowl of dark leafy greens
kale spinach which are you know top
sources of magnesium which 50 of people
do not consume adequate amounts of
folate
arugula arugula is a top source of
nitrates dietary nitrate really
important in terms of increasing blood
flow to the brain one single high
nitrate meal might actually improve
cognitive function it's that powerful
um dousing those dark leafy greens with
extra virgin olive oil which research
has shown out of barcelona spain the
pretty med study you can consume about a
liter a week
to better cognitive function cognitive
health cardiovascular health and it
might even help you lose weight because
it's so anti-inflammatory actually
there's a compound in extra virgin olive
oil that is as anti-inflammatory as
low-dose advil but without any of the
potential for negative side effects
and importantly
you need to have fat in that salad
because fat allows many of the most
important nutrients in the salad to
become bioavailable so i talk a lot
about in this book which i think is
bringing you know especially um you know
there's a lot i think actually that
there's a lot uh of new information that
i bring to the conversation but i talk
particularly about
um carotenoids and how research has
shown
out of university of georgia that by
eating uh lutein and zeaxanthin by by
supplementing with these carotenoids you
can actually boost visual processing
speed by 20
even if you're young and healthy so i
mean these are young and healthy people
that are already considered to be at the
peak of their cognitive prowess visual
processing speed is so important i mean
think about in terms of responding to
visual stimuli you know driving athletic
performance sports performance things
like video games video games yeah yeah
absolutely so
dark leafy greens are abundant in these
two carotenoids and they're only
absorbed through the digestive tract
when in the presence of fat you don't
absorb any of them unless you're
consuming them with fat so like that
fat-free dressing throw that in the
trash
extra virgin olive oil you know is super
key and then you know i try to
eat a uh a low-carb diet i try to avoid
um
dense sources of carbohydrate with the
exception of occasionally eating them in
the post-workout window
if you're going to eat carbs throughout
the day you really want to concentrate
them into one meal
it seems that when you consume your
carbs concentrated into one meal less
insulin is required to clear those carbs
from circulation that glucose from
circulation as opposed to if you were to
spread them out over the course of the
day
which makes that that old advice to eat
six small meals throughout the day
particularly bad because insulin seems
to be able to compound on itself
so rather than eating you know
30 grams of carbs at lunch 30 grams of
carbs at dinner 30 grams of carbs at
breakfast concentrate them into one meal
and there's less of an you know insulin
auc so less less insulin being
stimulated to clear that glucose which
is important because as we talked about
earlier glucose is very damaging when
it's uh in the blood it glycates those
proteins how to figure out if the keto
diet is right for you
let me ask you secretive secret
questions okay gotcha do you think
though that everybody should try keto
try
i think so why because i feel like for
most people if they can experience the
mental clarity the improvement cognitive
function just that alone will change
people's lives and so for me
i think
yes there could be a weight loss and a
fat loss
component of it but for me the biggest
thing with keto is shifting from
running off glucose to running off
ketones just for your brain like
nutrition for your brain
is probably the most remarkable thing
being able to go from eating six seven
meals a day to eating once or twice a
day and feeling optimal or going seven
days without food and still functioning
as a parent as you know running your
business like traveling i've done that
and it's amazing because i was told that
you can't do that otherwise you'll lose
all your muscle mass but
for me i think it's worth experimenting
with just for
how your brain can improve
there's a million ways to lose fat right
for sure and i think both you and i so i
used to be about 60 pounds heavier i
lost all my fat rapid starvation right
it was yeah total misery i hated every
single minute of it but it worked you're
guessing it doesn't work
um but my thing is and i find this so
interesting about keto i think you're
right it's an end of one everybody needs
to do self-experimentation you've got to
try it because
it it's the one dietary thing i say
changed my life completely from just
being in a constant state of
inflammation to then like that sense of
your inflammation drops to essentially
zero your relationship to hunger changes
um you know i agree with you i think
that there is so much individual
variability everybody has to try it but
keto is the one thing i'll say everybody
should try it yeah whether it works for
them or not i can't say yeah and i feel
like you know our bodies were designed
to do that for a reason we have this
backup system you know or whatever you
want to call it known as ketosis for a
reason right like it's how our species
evolved right
if we didn't have uh you know the
ketogenic state we probably would have
died off as a species right because we
went we had to go times without food
right there's feasts and famine and it
wasn't until like maybe 100 or 200 years
ago where we had access to food on
demand pretty much we could go to
grocery stores or there was always an
abundance of food and and because we've
grown up in that we've kind of like well
we have to eat three square meals a day
you know that's what we're taught and
it's like no you can go a long period of
time without food actually and still
function and and thrive actually right
now we have a keto craze going on
um from an evolutionary perspective
uh ketosis would have served us only
during starvation
so
when people tell me oh the way to eat
all the time is keto i go absolutely not
1.8 million years have proven that but
if you don't believe it look at look at
the research being done right now on
hunter-gatherer civilizations that are
still intact
now when i talk about ketosis i'm not
talking about half a millimole because
most of us wake up in the morning with
half a millimole of ketones i'm talking
about this absurdity of shooting for two
and three millimoles of ketosis unless
you're battling brain cancer right
this is actually
not a good idea
because it actually shifts mrna and dna
to think that you're in a starvation
state if you're eating 90 fat all the
time your body thinks wow this person
sucks
at finding food so we need to put this
body in like in in defcon 4 mode because
this idiot's going to die so let's shut
down the thyroid let's do all these
things to preserve
until we can get out of this jam we're
in and and proof of that is
if
if if two people are into keto
husband and wife
and they're both into they're posting
their keto pictures oh i'm 1.2
millimoles and my wife is 2.6 and they
and she gets pregnant
that baby will be imprinted with obesity
genes
because that baby is being formed under
the guys from an evolutionary
perspective that mom and dad suck at
finding food so we have to make this
baby so efficient that it turns
everything into
fat
and this has been proven when i look at
these things i look at them from
evolution i say okay where would ketosis
have really come okay famine it would
have got us through the famine would it
because we're metabolically flexible i
look at everything that way first why is
this
important why would we be endowed with
it where did it come from and then i do
my research from there it's almost like
there's two camps of thought around
diabetes on one end which is like
metabolically unhealthy end and then the
performance end which is the athletes
right it's almost like each group
there's like the high carb low fat
people and the low carb high fat people
on each side and so there's people who
think that you fix diabetes with low
carb high fat and there's people who
think you fix diabetes with high carb
low fat what i have found is that you
can actually get the same drop in
glucose
and the same drop in weight in in two
different programs a keto program versus
a high high carb low fat bro program in
the course of a year i'm seeing the same
drops of people with diabetes so i think
both can work it depends on the
individual i mean peter at basically has
said that 50 of people do not respond to
keto so the question is is are they
better adapted to a high carb low fat
diet or or maybe more of a balanced diet
but i think that we are going to learn
that like there are certain times in
your life that you might you might be
better or suited for a high carb diet
when i was in my 20s i had such an easy
time eating carbs it was like no problem
now then in my 30s it's like my my
metabolism shifted and i have to be
really careful with carbs and i really
have to eat them in accordance to how
much i exercise and are you saying that
based on the spike in glucose or based
on weight gain like definitely weight
but all i mean it she seems like i'm
more likely to put weight on when i eat
carbohydrates now but i also think that
um
you know like i i was able to drop my
blood glucose like a point in a year
from from hemoglobin a1c from 5.6 to 4.6
and over the course of a year and a lot
of it was carbohydrate reduction most
people who have been keto for any length
of time will report back dude i first of
all three meals a day can't even handle
it it's like i couldn't eat three meals
a day it's way too much food number two
i probably get by on 30 fewer calories
now
doing all the same activities than i did
before i was keto what's that about and
what that it's about it's about
metabolic efficiency it's about um you
know less
um
thermic effect of food you know
sometimes we eat a large meal more than
we should have and the body raises its
temperature just to kind of burn off
some of that fuel
right because it doesn't want that much
fuel at one time yes it tries to stash
the glucose into
the glycogen reserves the muscles if
there's not enough room goes to the fat
cells
you know yes there's some
protein but excess protein goes to the
liver gluconeogenesis gets converted to
sugar same same issue with that
so all these all of these
elements of of efficiency now you don't
need as much protein because you're
sparing protein instead of
deaminating it and then peeing it out
all the time
you don't need as much carbohydrate
because you've learned how to make
ketones from your own stored body fuel
those ketones
really reduce the amount of
glucose that you need to make or you
need to to take in from the outside
you know there's a
statement that many people make in the
keto world that there is no requirement
in human nutrition for carbohydrate at
all
because the body can make enough glucose
through gluconeogenesis and then offset
the rest of the requirements with
ketones
so the efficiency becomes
again a very um
important aspect in
reduction of inflammation because the
efficiency also carries with it a a
reduction in reactive oxygen species
from the
from the inefficient burning of fuel
to get rid of it uh the house cleaning i
talked about where where a cell will
look at the the environment and go
uh geez there's not enough uh substrate
around for me to dive to divide right
now so i think i'll i'll stay where i am
and i'll do some house cleaning and i'll
and i'll literally consume some of the
damaged proteins within
i'll uh consume some of the uh damaged
fats um
a cell might even say time for me to
give up the ghost i'm going to die
autophagy the the cell will will
self-destruct based on
the signals that it gets from the
environment which and that environment
is a a dearth if you will
of nutrients now conversely if you've if
you're eating every
couple of hours you know you're eating
three square meals a day plus snacks in
between plus something before you go to
bed which most people do
the body goes well there's so much food
around this is amazing so my cells they
can divide because there'll be plenty of
substrate and and food for the for the
two of me when i divide
but as we know from sort of the
anti-aging movement you know cells have
kind of a finite number of divisions
that's what the telomeres are all about
right and so if you can prolong that
time from from when one cell decides
it's time to divide
um and not only prolong the time but
then have that one cell start to do some
house cleaning
that's a critical kind of
theory behind the anti-aging movement
and the anti-aging aspect of keto and of
intermittent fasting
and of long-term fasting
so there's there's a lot of
it's like a new era of science that
we're in that we're embarking on here
that kind of has to go back and
re-figure
the science because the science for the
last several decades has kind of been
based on
body needs sugar
fat's bad uh heart attacks are caused by
fat and cholesterol
you know you can you can you have to do
exercise to burn off all the calories if
you want to lose weight all these things
have been shown to be
inaccurate now
thank you guys so much for watching this
episode of health theory i hope you guys
work with your doctor and give keto a
shot and i hope it's as impactful for
you as it was for me until next time my
friends be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you